Hello everyone, welcome back.
We're now going to look a little bit more
deeply into these mysterious gaps in
the solar spectrum.
So just to remind you when seen at
high resolution, the light of the sun
exhibits these dim spots which could
be interpreted as absorption features.
Indeed, that's what they are.
There's a complimentary phenomenon
with which you're probably familiar.
You undoubtedly have seen these
vivid gas signs, neon signs that
are often called in the United States
that exhibit very bright colors.
And these are due to
the very sharp emission
lines that are observed
in low density gases.
Here are two pertinent examples,
one is a spectra of atomic Hydrogen.
It's a discharge lamp, and
what you're seeing here
is the increase in the wavelength
going from left to right.
And you see very distinct isolated lines.
Red, a sort of a cyan, a blue and violet.
Actually rather near our reference
laser points this red line of Hydrogen
656 nanometers Balmer alpha, this is
the Balmer beta and so on, so called.
And down below the spectrum of neon,
more complicated but
as you can see,
it consists of fairly well-resolved,
quite sharp lines, rather than the sort of
rainbow feature that we see for
dispersed sunlight.
Now as it happens,
the emission lines that are observed in
the low density gasses often correspond
to the absorption features of the sun.
In fact, this line at 656 nanometers
is this large dark gap here.
This line is down here I believe and
the others have
their counterparts in the relevant
portions of the spectrum.
So it became understood
that the features seen in
the absorption spectrum in
the sun were due to the,
the same transitions that were giving
rise to emission in low density gases.
But the presence of these sharp and
distinct lines in
atoms was a great puzzle
because in classical mechanics,
a system of interacting particles
can have any set of positions and
velocities, and
there's nothing to single out
a particular configuration for
special attention.
So, atomic theory at the end
of the 19th century had
many clever ideas deriving from
things like vortices and fluids.
Where there was some type of a regular
structure that could be inferred.
But none of these bore any fruit in terms
of explaining the specific properties of
atomic spectrum.
I'll just mention in passing that
the vortex knot idea is coming
back into vogue in atomic physics
due to the ability to produce
vortex structures in gases,
in those Einstein condensates.
But, I mean these are not
elementary atomic structures,
they're rather a type of super fluid
pattern that can be generated by
appropriate excitation of the condensate.
But the whole idea of
the continuum models,
as atoms as some kind of fluid,
confronted a real
difficulty in the discovery
that atoms seemed to be made
of particles interacting
with electric charges,
and thereby interacting
by electric forces.
Notable development was
Rutherford's experiment in 1911
that showed that virtually all of
the mass of the atom is concentrated
in a minute fraction of its volume,
one whatever that is, a quadrillionth.
So it was as if this thing
that had a pretty well-defined
size is known from
a variety of measurements,
some as simple as looking at the thickness
of an oil film on the surface of water.
Taking the volume of
the ordinary oil drop and seeing
how far it would spread out gives a pretty
good indication of the size of an atom.
And most of it from Rutherford's
experiment had to be empty space
with all the mass
concentrated at the center.
So, this is actually a system
somewhat like the planetary system.
The sun is very massive, it sits
near the center of the solar system,
and the Earth has a much smaller mass and
stands off from the sun and orbits it.
We're going to see what
classical mechanics has to say
about the about the planetary, Atom.
That is one consisting of two
particles ordinarily well-separated
in an orbit very much like the orbits
of the planet the solar system.
This year is the 100th anniversary of
this great discovery by Niels Bohr,
which is reported in
the paper that's contained in
the additional materials section for
this course.
And Bohr developed the postulate that
there were certain planetary orbits,
Of the electron about the proton in
a hydrogen atom that would be stable and
that would correspond to
the stationary states of atoms.
So he basically solved the equations
of motion for the planetary system.
There's nothing novel about that.
Those solutions are well known.
And than stated a postulate
that certain of
the orbits in an atom would
provide the stationary
states that were seen in optical spectra.
And then that the radiation absorbed
in atoms would be associated as in this
case here with an atom falling
from a higher energy state,
larger orbit into a lower energy state and
emitting a photon into
the radiation field.
So that the frequency of the light
that is seen either in absorption or
emission corresponds
to the energy transfer
between the atom and the radiation field.
And in fact, the Balmer alpha line,
the red line that we see
in the absorption spectrum,
is 656 nanometers,
rather close to our reference laser.
Okay, so
let's see what classical mechanics tells
about these hydrogen-like systems.
So we have a single nucleus
with a position denoted by
r sub n, the mass M, the charge of +Ze.
Z is the atomic number, so
it'd be 1 for hydrogen, 2 for helium,
3 for lithium, and so on.
And then e is the what we
call the specific charge,
that's the absolute value of
the charge of the electron.
Then there's the electron described
by position vector r sub e,
little mass little m and
a negative charge of -e.
We're going to keep the masses in play
represented explicitly in
this treatment because
there's not such a big simplification
from changing them to something else.
And one of the exercises that we
want to do is to go through the process
that led to the discovery of deuterium.
It's a very important event, both from the
standpoint of scientific development of
nuclear physics and also the development
of nuclear energy and nuclear weapons.
And it was a discovery that was made by
looking at the Balmer series of hydrogen.
Okay, now here are the Newton's equation.
It's MA, mass times the second derivative,
the acceleration of
the nuclear coordinate.
And then, this is Coulomb's Law.
There's an equation of motion for
the nuclear coordinate.
The force on it is in the direction
of the electron nuclear distance and
it's inversely proportional to
the square of that distance.
You see there's a factor
of r from the vector and
a factor of r cubed below, so
that's one over r squared force law.
And then according to Newton's, what
is it, Third Law, there's an equal but
opposite force on the electron,
so you have the same thing there.
Now, I'm using this coordinate r here,
which is the separation
between the nucleus and
the electron coordinates because
that is in fact the relevant
length that describes
the electrical force law.
What you can do now is you divide, okay?
Take this equation and divide it
by 1 over m, multiple by 1 over m.
And you multiply this
equation by 1 over little m.
And you subtract them and so
you get an equation of motion for
the electron nucleus separation alone.
So you see on this side you have
the second derivative of that is just
a function of itself.
So we've now managed to get an equation
that can be solved directly for
the separation between the two particles.
So from this equation,
we go directly here, you see, we're just
taking the mass,
this term here is a dimension.
This term here has
the dimensions of 1 over mass,
so we just invert it to get what's
called the reduced mass and
now we have a simple Newtonian
equation for the motion of
the relative distance between
the electron and the nucleus.
Now we define the momentum, p,
associated with this coordinate.
It's just the mass times the velocity.
The usual definition, and
this then allows us to rewrite
the equations of motion as a pair of
coupled first-order equations in time.
So here's that equation we just made up.
It's the r-dot is 1 over mu times p.
And then p-dot is just
taken from this equation,
because p-dot is our double dot and so
it's just minus Ze squared r over r cubed.
Now, why do we reduce this to first
order equations, you might ask?
So I emphasized the development
of equations that are first-order
in time because the whole idea of
solving the equations of motion for
a system means that if you have
a specification of the state at time T,
you can find it's the state
at some later time.
For small time, that means that
you need to have an equation of
motion that is first-order in the time for
that state.
That's why Schrodinger's equation
must be first-order in time.
So the whole idea of quantum
mechanics is that the wave
function psi defines a state.
And if we know psi at time t,
and we know the Hamiltonian operator,
then we can determine psi at
some slightly later time.
So this is something that
seems rather different
from some of the classical equations of
motion with which you might be familiar.
Here's an example to
consider in an inline quiz.
So I hope you appreciated
from that previous example,
that the familiar second-order wave
equation that went off and deals with.
It's a convenient way of
solving the wave equation.
But it's sort of a secondary
equation that's based
on primary first order equations.
So, there's no real difference
between quantum mechanics and
classical mechanics in that respect.
In classical mechanics, in order to
solve the equations of motion, say for
electrodynamics, to solve
the equations of motion and time.
You need to know the value of the electric
field and its first derivatives in time.
Let's say, as an initial value problem.
Whereas in quantum mechanics,
we just have this one wave function
that provides all the information needed
to solve the equations of motions
once the Hamiltonian's known.